Title: Academic Practices in Selected School of Ormoc City Division

Authors: Senefrota, Marimel

Keywords: Academic Practices, challenges and collaborative skills

Publication date: 2025-05-30

Description:
This study sought to determine the socio-demographic profile of the respondents, perceived academic practices by students and teachers, challenges encountered. It involved 221 students and 43 teachers in the School Year 2023-2024, randomly selected by getting 20% from both sex in every grade level. Descriptive method was used using a researcher-made questionnaire. Data was interpreted using frequency tables and chi-square test. Socio-demographic profile in terms of sex was more or less equal. All students went through the same rigors and expected to abide by the academic policies and procedures, 14&ndash;16 years old got the highest percentage, majority were from grade eight. Students from this level were more adaptable and compliant compared to other grade level. Students' perception was significantly higher than teachers' perceptions, shown by the chi-square value of 16.985 with a p-value less than .001. Students&rsquo; value making their own projects and requirements, rarely go to the library for further enrichment on their research article instead of reproducing pages from books. Teachers&rsquo; responses revealed that students cited proper referencing and citations in their research, the least was that students worked collaboratively in answering assignments before the scheduled date of submission. These findings indicate that students need to embody a passion for research, establish study habits and prepare for examinations and teachers to integrate more collaborative activities with students to enhance collaborative skills, demonstrate initiative, maturity and responsibility. Family and parents posed the greatest challenge. Hence, a caring and supportive family should set forth a motivating and inspiring environment to produce children with academic practices that uphold right values and conduct.


Contents:
 - 3.-Senefrota-Publish.pdf
