Title: Get active and nourish your life! Habits of physical activity and healthy eating. A learning situation

Authors: Puertas-Molero, P., González-Valero, G., Álvarez-Muñoz, A., Melguizo-Ibáñez, E.

Keywords: Educación Física, Situación de Aprendizaje, Educación Primaria, Actividad Física, Hábitos Saludables, Primary Education, Physical Activity, Healthy Habits, Educação Física, Situação de Aprendizagem, Ensino Fundamental, Atividade Física, Hábitos Saudáveis

Publication date: 2024-06-01

Description:
Abstract:

Introduction: The present didactic unit is composed of a learning situation that addresses healthy living habits as the main axis. This learning situation focuses on physical activity and eating habits, as these concepts offer multiple benefits and implications in the individual and collective work of students. At an educational level, it allows the integration of the different curricular elements related to physical education, providing an interdisciplinary approach that enriches the student's integral education. It also promotes values such as responsibility, respect, and solidarity by encouraging care for one's own body and respect for the well-being of others. Aim: The main objectives of the study are to develop a learning situation in which physical activity and healthy eating habits are addressed. The aim is to promote awareness of the importance of an active lifestyle and a balanced diet to prevent chronic diseases. Methods: In accordance with current legislation, a didactic unit has been proposed, which has been developed considering the guidelines established in Annex I of Royal Decree 157/2022 for the elaboration of learning situations in the primary education stage. Starting with a justification of the proposal, the final product and the curricular link are discussed. All of this is worked on and pursued through the activities and exercises presented in each of the phases of the didactic sequence. Results and discussion: As can be seen, the main results of the study revolve around the approach of ten sessions organized around the phases of the didactic sequence. The activities and exercises that are proposed, in addition to responding to the main curricular elements, help to respond to the main challenges of the 21st century and the sustainable development goals. Conclusions: Text. Through this didactic proposal, we will contribute to the improvement of the students' abilities and aptitudes, promoting the necessary learning for the integral development of the group-class. Likewise, it can be established that the area of Physical Education can contribute to promoting healthy habits and lifestyles, which implies generating routines for the care of the body.


Contents:
 - _ESHPA-8-2-004-Puertas-Molero.pdf
