Title: Organizational Climate and Teacher Enthusiasm: Base of Creating a Harmonious Environment in the Classroom for Teaching and Learning

Authors: Dr.Senapati Nayak, Smt.Sujata Bankar, Manjulata Sharma, Dr.Sushma Wankhede, Dr.Piyadhar Singh Kanwar

Keywords: 

Publication date: 2025-06-05

Description:
The main objective of efforts to improve teaching is to create conditions that are more supportive of&nbsp;students' learning and social development. The most concrete results of teaching activities occur during&nbsp;teaching activities carried out in the classroom environment. Therefore, it is appropriate to focus on what&nbsp;happens in the classroom to improve teaching. The quality of interactions between students and teachers&nbsp;is influenced by the emotional states of both parties. According to a qualitative study, helpfulness, a&nbsp;positive attitude towards students, passion for teaching, and willingness to spend time with students areessential characteristics of a passionate teacher. In the context of the present study, teacher enthusiasm is&nbsp;defined as an enduring passion for the subject and dedication to the profession, with the involvement of&nbsp;teachers and stakeholders being essential characteristics of a school's organizational climate. Generally,&nbsp;the teacher's ability to instil an appreciation for the intrinsic value of learning and to provide knowledge&nbsp;to students as an effective means of imparting knowledge is seen as a result of creating an environment&nbsp;that encourages and values the exchange of information and increases teacher motivation. In contrast, a&nbsp;negative climate is associated with lower satisfaction and negative emotions. Organizational values and&nbsp;practices that facilitate and encourage information exchange increase teacher motivation. This article&nbsp;discusses the potential impact of organizational climate on teacher motivation, which may in turn affect&nbsp;teacher teaching and professional development.


Contents:
 - IJSRED-V7I6P98.pdf
