Title: Business Environment and Entrepreneurial Intention among Employed Individuals

Authors: Venus P. Balintongog, Marichu B. Montecillo

Keywords: 

Publication date: 2025-05-26

Description:

<span lang="EN-AU">The pursuit of entrepreneurial ventures serves as a powerful engine for economic growth and innovation. Likewise, a conducive business environment is an important factor that help employees foster entrepreneurial intention. The purpose of this paper is to examine the entrepreneurial intentions of government employees in Bukidnon, Philippines. A descriptive-correlational research design was employed to gather data from government employees across 14 agencies and instrumentalities. Participants were selected using stratified random sampling, and data were collected using adapted survey questionnaire. Results showed that employees perceived the quality of business environment as very satisfactory, with competitive landscape as the highly rated indicator. Furthermore, employees exhibited a high entrepreneurial intention with personal attitude accumulate the highest rating of the three determinants of entrepreneurial intention. Correlation analysis revealed a moderate positive significant relationship between the business environment and entrepreneurial intention among employed individuals. The study concluded that an employee who has favorable perception of the business environment in terms of the economic climate, political environment, and competitive landscape tends to manifest entrepreneurial intention. The findings are expected to provide an insight on how business environment can be harnessed to achieve great results in upturning entrepreneurial intentions especially among employees. The government authorities may implement targeted interventions to strengthen the entrepreneurial intentions of employed individuals through the development of support programs that provide access to capital, entrepreneurial training, and mentorship for employed individuals seeking self-employment.</span>


Contents:
 - V5I583.pdf
